2003 FALL SIMULATION INTEROPERABILITYWORKSHOP - OUTBRIEFSTABLE OF CONTENTSAnalysis (ANL) Forum	1 Assessment of the Need for Product Data Representation Standards Study Group (ANPDRS SG)	2 Base Object Models Product Development Group (BOM PDG)	3  Command, Control, Communication, Computers & Intelligence (C4I) Forum	4 Command, Control, Communication, Computers & Intelligence Simulation Interoperability    Technical Reference Model II Study Group (C4ISR TRM II SG)	7   Communication, Frameworks and Infrastructure (CFI) Forum 	8Common Image Generator Interface Study Group (CIGI SG) 	9DIS Extension Study Group (DIS SG)	10Distributed Simulation Processes and Tools Forum (DSPT) Distributed Simulation            Development Process Forum (PROC) Forum Session	12Distributed Simulation Processes and Tools Forum (DSPT) Exercise Management &   Feedback Forum (EMF) Forum Session	13  Dynamic Link Compatible HLA API Product Development Group (HLA API PDG)	14Environmental Data Coding Specification Product Development Group  (EDCS) 	15 Extensible Modeling Simulation Framework Study Group (XMSF SG)  	16International Session	18Information Operations – Intelligence, Surveillance & Reconnaissance (IO-ISR) Forum	19Intelligent Tutoring System Interoperability Study Group (ITSI SG)  	20Link-16 Simulation Standard Product Development Group (LINK-16 PDG)	22Logistics (LOG) Forum 	23Medical Simulation (MED) Forum	25  Medical Federation Object Model Study Group (MED FOM SG)	27 Research, Development & Engineering (RD&E) Forum	31Real-Time Platform Reference FOM 2.0 Product Development Group (RPR FOM PDG)	32System Acquisition and Product Development (SAPD) Forum 	33Simulation Conceptual Modeling Study Group (SCM SG)	35Synthetic Mission Space (SMS) Forum 	36Simulated Natural Environment (SNE) Forum	38Simulation Reference Markup Language Study Group (SRML SG) 	39Test and Evaluation (T&E) Forum	40Transfer Control Study Group (TC SG)	41Training (TRAIN) Forum	43Verification, Validation & Accreditation (VV&A) Forum	45Verification, Validation & Accreditation Overlay to FEDEP Product Development Group    (VV&A FEDEP PDG)	46Vehicle and Weapon System Modeling (VWS) Forum	47ANALYSIS FORUMChairEmmet BeekerVice ChairJohn FaySecretary(None)Objectives for this Workshop:1. 	Examine advances in distributed simulation for application to analysis.2. 	List deficiencies in current distributed simulation technologies.3.	Suggest promising areas for research and exploitation.Comments and Recommendations:Distributed simulation in support of analysis is showing promiseData collection and loggingHLA supporting some linking of simulationsAreas for improvement remain:Causality and time managementRepeatability, particularly with stochastic simulationsSemantic interoperability (e.g., data link simulation/modeling)Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)36Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)44Peak attendance (including joint sessions) (IO-ISR)55Total papers presented9“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions0Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):03F-SIW-01503F-SIW-093Assessment of the Need for Product Data Representation Standards Study Group (ANPDRS SG)ChairJim CoolahanVice ChairMike HaasSecretaryKim LarsenObjectives for this Workshop:Review Terms of Reference (TOR) and discuss scope of products to be addressed.Develop draft list of known existing applicable standards efforts, and determine non-SISO groups with which collaboration is needed.Determine work breakdown structure, determine Study Group (SG) member near-term assignments, and schedule future meetings.Comments and Recommendations:There are many existing standards efforts that need to be reviewed for applicability; SG members have taken assignments to review and provide information using a standard template.There are a number of non-SISO groups, and some SISO SGs/PDGs, with which liaison needs to be established; SG members have taken liaison assignments.Several near-term actions have been assigned, including making a schedule of SG activities, developing a template for information collection on applicable standards, completing the template for each applicable standard, and identifying “use cases” to help determine where standards apply or are needed.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)15Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)15Peak attendance (including joint sessions)15Total papers presented0“No-show” presentationsN/AOther presentations and panel discussions1Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):N/AN/AN/ABase Object Models Product Development Group (BOM PDG) ChairLarry RootVice ChairBob LutzSecretaryJane BachmanObjectives for this Workshop:Present the BOM PDG schedule and report on the current status of the BOM PDG DG.Provide a User Needs / Adopters session where Trial Use, XMSF, Link 16 PDG, and SRML are presented and discussed.Provide a Technical Aspects session where Interface Specification work including Metadata and OMT-X and BOM Schemas are discussed.Identify and approve Assigned Reviewers for DG documentsEncourage review by PDG membership during comment review(s) and trial use period.Encourage BOM-based application and development by community with feedback back to SISO and BOM PDG.Comments and Recommendations:1.	The BOM specification is intended to influence four things within the M&S community:  Substantative Interoperability, Reusability, Composability, and Adaptability.  2.	Recommend user community to read the following BOM PDG Papers of Interest:  03F-SIW-013, 03F-SIW-015, 03F-SIW-072, 03F-SIW-080, 03F-SIW-095, 03F-SIW-109, 03F-SIW-112, and 03F-SIW-121.3.	Recommend a better conference room to meet.  The room needs the ACs running but then it is very difficult to hear.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)34Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)34Peak attendance (including joint sessions)0Total papers presented0Other presentations and panel discussions9Command, Control, Communication, Computers & Intelligence Forum (C4I)ChairDr. Andreas TolkVice ChairJohn Daly SecretaryTom MullinsDon TimianAdin BurroughsObjectives for this Workshop:1.	Evaluate Applicability of M&S in the context of Net-Centric Warfare (Future Combat System, Global Information Grid, M&S Web-Services)2.	Migration Standards for Legacy Solutions, Interoperability of Legacy Solutions (Interfaces and Federations)3.	International OutreachComments, Keypoints and Recommendations:The Joint Technical Architecture (JTA) moved M&S up to be a domain of its own (beside Weapon Systems, Command and Control, and Combat Support).  The M&S domain has no sub-domains so far and only few standards are included.  SISO should submit its products to the JTA to fill this gap.SISO must establish a liaison with the JTA office and submit current and future results to the JTA to actively shape the M&S domain.  M&S Web Services are operationally required (Joint Command and Control, Net Centric Warfare) and become technically feasible.SISO must become the partner for standardizing M&S Web Services.We need improved Coordination of PDG/SG. The development of M&S Web Services must be coordinated with the GIG requirements and vice versa, as M&S will induce a new set of requirements.  The vehicle of SISO to do so is the suite of Study Groups and Product Development Tools.  Examples are the C4ISR/Sim TRM, the BOM, SRML, and increasingly important the XMSF Profile.  Consequently, the Extensible Battle Management Language (X-BML) will be used to establish an XMSF-Profile.  The C4ISR/Sim TRM will be used to define XMSF-Profiles as well.SISO SAC must establish a coordination and collaboration committee to align the requirements of the various SG/PDG and align the results.  SG/PDG are overlapping and not independent. We need either mandatory liaisons within the SG/PDG or support by SAC. As a minimum suggest resuming the practice of sending a posse between inter-related groups to ensure communication.The use of the Model Driven Architecture (MDA) is becoming reality.  The use within the Air Force was presented in the C4I Forum.  Other presentations were given with this topic during Fall 03 SIW as well.SISO must track the use and consider the alignment of Platform Independent Models and should consider the standardization of the profiles (including but not limited to XMSF profiles) promising candidates.Although M&S starts to show up in GIG presentations, the Role of M&S in the new Joint JC2 and GIG Enterprise Services is underrepresented.SISO must participate in the process of defining requirements effecting M&S for the next generation of C4. A Study Group or some other standardization activity should be initiated at the Spring 04 SISO. The DoD is initiating Reference Model Development supporting Net Centric C4 development. Several presentations were concerned with C4 and M&S Reference Model Development.SISO should participate in harmonization between M&S and C4 community Reference Models, possibly by a common MDA approach.The M&S Development Kit for the Common Operating Environment (COE) is now available and can be distributed.  Although it was designed by NRL, it is not only applicable in the GCCS/GCCS-M context but also in the DISA COE, i.e., other services than Navy as well as joint (and combined) COE based simulation becomes possible.SISO – in particular the C4I forum – must observe the development and as soon as it is mature enough should recommend the MSDK for COE as a general SISO standard.Lack of  interoperability can be defined as a failure to integrate. The M&S and C4I communities are both at an historic nexus – both are now switching to web-services to facilitate their interoperability and in near time-synch. Such an opportunity may not happen again this century. Outreach is required in order to meet the minds and form joint requirements.The C4I forum and the planned C4I-Simulation product development group should take advantage of the upcoming Spring SIW in Washington, DC to invite members of the C4I development community to join with us.9.	Since the DIS days, the subjects of communications effects and datalink simulation have been largely ignored. Needs exist for either dedicated conferences for these subjects, or a major focus in SISO. What the community probably does not need is two more simulation conferences.Consider focusing a future call for papers for the C4I forum in each of these subject areas for papers leading to SG/PDG activities, or consider startup-forums within the C4ISR Track addressing these specialty areas.	C4I Forum Fall 2003 SIW StatisticsAverage attendance (excluding joint sessions)50Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)69Peak attendance (including joint sessions)65Total papers presented21Other presentations and panel discussions(P) Use of XMSF within the GIG(P) The Extensible Battle Management Language XBML(D) Future of the C4ISR/Sim TRM3Command, Control, Communication, Computers & Intelligence Simulation Interoperability Technical Reference Model II Study Group (C4ISR TRM II SG)ChairDr. Andreas TolkFrank CarrJim CaylorObjectives for this Workshop:1.	Termination of the Study Group2.	Decision on possible Follow-on EffortsCommentsThe C4ISR/Sim TRM II Study Group was terminatedThe Group will start to work on the preparation of a product development group working on a guideline for M&S to C4I system coupling based on the actual C4ISR/Sim TRMDecision:Jim Caylor – Lead Content of the PDG target document: A general description: guide for the use of the TRM, focus on the TRM, how it can be used, along with a categorical bibliography & lexicon, putting the TRM into the context of other models, architectures, etc.PDG will have formal process for elections for officers, editorTom Mullins will post process doc on TRM reflectorFor development of the Product Nomination: Pull Link-16 GroupJim Caylor will create a draft PN and circulate itWe will use the C4ISR/TRM SG II reflector until the PDG is establishedMaintain critical mass, and clear goal  C4I Forum Fall 2003 SIW StatisticsAverage attendance (excluding joint sessions)20Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)20Peak attendance (including joint sessions)20Total papers presentedN/AOther presentations and panel discussionsN/ACommunication, Frameworks and Infrastructure Forum (CFI)ChairSteve BoswellVice ChairSteve MonsonSecretaryVacantObjectives for this Workshop:OMT experience and 1516 experienceData Distribution concepts and techniquesComments and Recommendations:Attendance was lower than usual (hurricane, SMS, C4I and other parallel?)Papers were presented well OMG Data Distribution Service (DDS) very interesting (03F-SIW-065&-066)Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)35Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)50Peak attendance (including joint sessions)60Total papers presented13“No-show” presentations1Other presentations and panel discussions0Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):03F-SIW-06503F-SIW-110Common Image Generator Interface Study Group (CIGI SG)ChairRonald G. MooreVice ChairWillard B PhelpsSecretaryMichael ButterworthObjectives for this Workshop:The purpose of the Common Image Generator Interface (CIGI) Study Group (SG) meeting is to kick off an activity to evaluate industry and government interest in developing a standard image generator interface. Comments and Recommendations:- There has been earlier DIS/SIW interest in developing a standard image generator interface.  Earlier attempts include CLIP, OpenScene and VBI.  Many vendors have proprietary interfaces.  The question is: should SISO development/promote an industry image generator standard.- Some attendees wondered why now. Factors include the Navy interest in CIGI (making it a requirement for new programs), Boeing’s open source approach (CIGI source code available free), increasing number of IG vendors, market migration to commercial hardware, software only IGs, and government’s push to lower acquisition and maintenance costs.- Some attendees wonder if SISO is the correct organization for an interface standard internal to a simulator.  Other organizations like SIGGRAPH were suggested.- The study group will survey government and industry to assess interest in an image generator standard.- The survey will include questions regarding what kind of standard should be perused, if interested in a standard.- The study group will consider other organizations to sponsor CIGI.- The study group will identify the intended recipients for an image generator interface standard.- The study group will provide a recommendation to proceed to CIGI Product Develop Group (PDG) or terminate discussions due to lack of interest/value/need/…Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)12Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)15Peak attendance (including joint sessions) (IO-ISR)n/aTotal papers presented0“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions1Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations): N/ADIS Extension Study Group (DIS SG)ChairFrank Hill (SDS International)Vice ChairGraham Shanks (AMS)SecretaryGrayden Figart (Gray Hawk Systems)Objectives for this Workshop:Select Vice Chair and Secretary.Review need for DIS Study Group.Discuss the process for submitting problems and change requests..Review initial list of DIS problems and change requests..Comments and Recommendations:1.	The DIS Study Group was assigned a half-day block on Thursday (1330-1700).  This was sufficient to accomplish our objectives.  2.	Graham Shanks volunteered to be the vice-chair and Grayden Figart offered to be the secretary.3.	The State of DIS was reviewed and the reason given for forming a DIS Study Group. Five years of the absence of a DIS forum has led to individual services, organizations and companies interpreting the IEEE 1278.1a to meet their needs which have led to interoperability issues.  New distributed simulation requirements have also emerged which need to be addressed.  DIS and DIS/HLA gateways are still prevalent in the worldwide distributed simulation environment and will be for the foreseeable future.4.	All proposed clarifications to the DIS Standards and new DIS capabilities will be reviewed to ensure that they are compatible with the HLA RPR FOM and the HLA Standards.5.	A draft process for submitting DIS problems and change requests was discussed. A draft Problem/Change Request (PCR) Form was reviewed and updated based on the discussions.6.	An initial list of 45 DIS PCR’s was reviewed.7.	The group’s work will proceed in phases as follows:	a.	Outreach to gather DIS issues and non-standard DIS implementations.	b.	Process PCRs and perform initial analysis.	c.	Draft a PDG Nomination for an IEEE 1278.1 PDG for changes needed to theDIS Standards. By the Spring 2004 SIW.	d.	Draft a PDG Nomination for a RPR-FOM PDG for changes needed to RPR and GRIM documentation based on DIS changes by the Fall 2004 SIW	e.	Interim Report at Spring 2004 SIW.	f.	Final Report at Fall 2004 SIW.8.	To expedite the work of the group, whenever possible and feasible, draft documentation will be generated as part of the analysis of a PCR that can be provided as an input to the PDG.9.	The group agreed that we need to advertise the work of the DIS Study Group to DoD agencies, companies and other organizations.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)9Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)22Peak attendance (including joint sessions)N/ATotal papers presented0“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions0Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):None___________________________________________Submitted by Frank HillSDS International23 September 2003Distributed Simulation Processes and Tools Forum (DSPT)Distributed Simulation Development Process Forum (PROC) SessionChairJake BorahVice ChairJeff BergenthalSecretaryVacantObjectives for this Workshop:1.	Sessions focused on developing a generalized system engineering process for constructing and executing distributed simulations.2.	Reviewed "lessons learned" solutions from creating real-world, useful M&S applications.3.	Peer-to-peer sharing of insights into problems of integration, scalability, reuse, robustness, and the effectiveness of HLA 1516 standards.Comments and Recommendations:1.	Automated process modeling tools and standardized interchange formats would greatly help the construction of distributed simulation systems.2.	HLA 1516 Standards go a long way toward broadening wider acceptance of HLA in commercial marketplace.3.	HLA Standards increased the reusability and interoperability of legacy simulations.4.	The FEDEP was reaffirmed as a good systems engineering process for constructing distributed simulation systems.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)25Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)42Peak attendance (including joint sessions)54Total papers presented7“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions0Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):03F-SIW-09803F-SIW-08003F-SIW-027Distributed Simulation Processes and Tools Forum (DSPT)Exercise Management & Feedback Forum (EMF) SessionChairDave BortVice ChairJane BachmanSecretaryVacant –(Phil Moul Acting)DSPT is a consolidation of the Federation Development Process Forum (PROC) and the Exercise Management and Feedback Forum (EMF). Objectives for this Workshop:1.	Tools focused on the Federation development and execution life-cycle process.2. 	Specifically tools involved in exercise planning, initialization, monitoring and control, and data collection and repositories.3.	Tools regarding visualization, analysis and after-action review.Comments and Recommendations:1.	Simulation Interoperability Test Harness (SITH) is useful for federation development and integration.  It was built for JSIMS and is being used in several other programs.  (03F-SIW-027)2.	Beowulf Administrative Technology (BAT) is a suite of tools that addressed issues with Beowulf cluster loading.  The suite of tools will help determine the optimal number of nodes in the cluster.  (03F-SIW-025)Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)47Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)55Peak attendance (including joint sessions)54Total papers presented03Other presentations and panel discussions0Dynamic Link Compatible HLA API Product Development Group (HLA API PDG)ChairSteve Monson  (The Boeing Company)Vice ChairVacantSecretaryKatia Sullivan (Aegis Technologies)1.3 Drafting Group Leaders: 	Editor:  Steve Drake  (The Boeing Company)Assistant: Len Granowetter  (MaK Technologies)Assistant:  Björn Möller  (Pitch)Assistant:  Roger Wuerfel  (SAIC)1516 Drafting Group Leaders: Editor:  VacantAssistant:  Len Granowetter  (MaK Technologies)Assistant:  Björn Möller  (Pitch)Assistant:  Roger Wuerfel  (SAIC)Objectives for this Workshop:Review HLA 1.3 API StatusResolve all HLA 1516 API technical issuesUpdate HLA 1516 API scheduleComments and Recommendations:1.  HLA 1.3 API standard ready for community balloting. 2.  HLA 1516 API technical issues resolved.3.  HLA 1516 API standard needs to be drafted.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)15Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)15Peak attendance (including joint sessions)15Total papers presented0“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions2Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):NONEEnvironmental Data Coding Specification Product Development Group(EDCS PDG)ChairBob RichbourgVice ChairDale MillerObjectives for this Workshop:1.	Review status of PDG products to date, discuss planned products2.	Discuss status of ISO EDCS and review issue from last PDG meeting3.	Discuss PDG actions prior to acceptance at ISOComments and Recommendations:1.	Products to data include 2 SISO Reference Products (SIW papers). Next planned activity is for the Drafting Group to produce one more SIW paper (reviewing EDCS content and use) after EDCS reaches status as Final Draft International Standard and documents are made available to the PDG).  Ultimately, the PDG intends to produce a SISO Guidance Product that references the ISO EDCS standard as best practice.2.	The EDCS FDIS should be released to the PDG later this month.  At the last PDG meeting, the group discussed the characteristic of the EDCS that it allows different codes to be used to denote the same concept (e.g., classification LIGHTHOUSE or classification BUILDING with attribute BUILDING_FUNCTION and attribute value LIGHTHOUSE).3.	The PDG affirmed that this characteristic of the EDCS poses a problem for both data producers and data consumers.   Several courses of action that can alleviate the associated problems were discussed.  These included documenting EDCS-to-EDCS mappings, development and imposition of a syntax for EDCS concept definitions, and creating a logical decomposition of EDCS concepts.  The group agreed that EDCS-to-EDCS mappings are desirable and achievable.  A syntax is desirable, but examples are requested prior to assessing achievability.  There was less support for logical decomposition.  The PDG members agreed to post on-hand mappings to the reflector for group review.  The PDG also agreed to review mappings, syntax, and decomposition documents when posted to the reflector.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)15Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)20Peak attendance (including joint sessions)N/ATotal papers presented0“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions0Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):N/AExtensible Modeling Simulation Framework Study Group (XMSF SG)ChairKatherine L. MorseVice ChairAndreas TolkSecretaryJohnny GarciaObjectives for this Workshop:1. 	Review the TOR.2.	Elect XMSF officers.Katherine L. Morse – ChairAndreas Tolk – Vice Chair  Johnny Garcia - Secretary3.  	Identify Profiles.Comments and Recommendations:Study group tasks  Definition of XMSF profile Goal statement – Curt Blais, Katherine L. Morse, Andreas Tolk, Johnny GarciaDevelopment of CONOPS – Michael Karlsson, Johnny GarciaReference the GRIM document USE cases for profilesPeople bringing the candidates need to participate in the development of the CONOPS1.	Identifying potential candidate implementations for profiling.Send out to reflector for feedback on what a profile is 2.	Survey profile definitions on other technology domainsStart from list as well as experiences to research – Kurt Blais, Ed Sims, Andy Bowers and Paul Gustafson Submit to XMSF Profile reflector3.	Determine applicability of other profile definitions to XMSF4.	Review early XMSF exemplars to identify the breadth of information required to document interoperability with the exemplars5.	Identify XMSF specific requirements for profiles6.	Identify and Recommend a mechanism for documenting the interrelationships of the applicable web-based technologies, protocol standards, and metadata markups selected for a profile.7.	Draft XMSF profile standard.Candidates Implementations for testing profilesWeb-enabled RTI – exemplars XBML – webized components using the XMSF frames to show exemplars at	I/ITSEC and demos with possible candidate customersBOM’s Base object models – SRML and XMSF within BOMSRML – Simulation reference markup language relationship is intended to be 	a product that works, XML with addition of behavioral attributes; SRML 	reflector on SISO site with a survey, please completePossible references:ISO Standards using profiles W3C profiles ECMA Profile standards – European Computer manufactures association 	profileGuest Speaker – SRML study group survey on the SISO reflector-	Data and Metadata behavioral standardsPaul Gustafson – BOM PDG-	A reusable package of information representing an independent pattern of simulation interplay-	Used as a building block in the development and the extension of simulation and or interoperable environments-	VV&A, Logistics, XMSFAndreas Tolk – XBML, Repositories with XMSF profiles-	XBML testbed architecture-	XMSF C4I testbed as a candidate for XMSF profiles	i.	Enhance WSDL, UDDI	ii.		Component repositories	iii.		Behavior with SRML	iv.		M&S service for the GIG/GES/NCES Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)40Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)40Peak attendance (including joint sessions)0Total papers presented3Other presentations and panel discussions (BOM, SRML, XBML)3International Session (INT)OrganizersPaul BosherGraham ShanksObjectives for this Workshop:Solicit help for the conference committee on organizing the international sessionPresent briefings on current activities and plans on international and multinational programsBriefing presented on the following:UK Ministry of Defence UpdateSwedish M&S ActivitiesSISO Canada UpdateInternational M&S InitiativesAverage attendance (excluding joint sessions)~20Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)N/APeak attendance (including joint sessions)N/ATotal papers presented0Other presentations)4Information Operations – Intelligence, Surveillance & Reconnaissance Forum(IO-ISR) ChairGary Waag, TITANVice ChairAndreas Tolk, VMASC/ODUSecretary-Vacant-Objectives for this Workshop:1.	Continue to provide a forum for discussion and exchange of ideas related to IO and/or ISR modeling2.	Discuss history of IO-ISR forum, lack of discussion or progress towards any standards, and future of the ForumComments and Recommendations:1.	Space modeling receiving increased attention, as demonstrated by three Space M&S-related papers presented jointly with Analysis & VWS.2.	Invited briefing on the Virtual Network Simulator sparked discussion on a useful IO-effects taxonomy for network attacks that could lead to a valuable M&S STANDARD for IO modeling.  This would need a “Champion” to emerge to push the issue as the current IO-ISR leadership is standing down as of this workshop.3.	Discussions were held about the fact that our Call For Papers (CFP) seems to have little influence on the papers that are submitted.  Rather, it seems that papers are submitted irrespective of the CFP, and then we try to sort them out to see which of the various Forum CFP’s the papers most closely fit.  Assuming others agree with this perception, this might merit revisiting the effort put into the development of our CFP every workshop.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)35Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)40Peak attendance (including joint sessions)55Total papers presented4“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions1Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):None of the 4 papers presented was all that excitingIntelligent Tutoring System Interoperability Study Group (ITSI SG)ChairTBD by emailVice ChairTBD by emailSecretaryTBD by email EditorTBD by email (thought to be unnecessary for this SG)OrganizerSusann LuperfoyObjectives for this Workshop:Formally launch ITSI Study GroupCollect feedback/suggestions on draft documents and planRefine our framework for interoperability documentationDefine schedule of milestones, roles, and deliverablesComments and Recommendations:Since several of the interested contributors to the SG and stakeholders in our conclusions were not able to attend the workshop, we decided to elect SG officers by email after the workshop.  It was suggested that all officers of the SG be people who will attend SISO workshops.  Two nominations were madeA number of legitimate procedural issues were raisedShould this SG even exist; is there too much overlap with related work done at SAIC, DMSO, and for other customers?  In the interest of progress on the SG topic we had to table that discussion referring requestor to the Executive Committee and the SISO approval process. Concern was expressed that we cite sources of any definitions that appear in the glossary of constructs to be used by this SG.  In the case where we believe our definitions are the product of combined decades of experience in relevant fields and are not traceable to a single source, then it is recommended that we include a bibliography of references.Concern was expressed that the DARWARS vision was too narrow to cover the interests of the entire SISO community.  Our TAD, Mark McCall referred the group to the original TOR and the long-term vision that is articulated there. We believe that the DARWARS vision as we stated it—for multiple users with individual, team, and organization-wide training objectives, logging in and logging out of a persistent simulation-based training systems—subsumes the interests of the contingent of SISO who are interested in intelligent training applications that are software simulation-based.Concern was expressed that we had not included key members of both DARWARS architecture teams.  This concern was dispelled with a review of minutes from our organizational meeting involving members of both teams, and several subsequent meetings involving technical and business leadership from both architecture teams.  We were able to make progress on three of our four agenda items for the workshop including group review of four items:Review of the minutes from our organizational meeting 4/2/03Review of the final approved TOR document as a formal statement of the charter for this Study GroupReview of the general structure for the glossary currently in draft formReport on a series of meetings held at technical conferences to announce the SG to the broadest possible community of stakeholdersAnnouncement of the ITS_resource website as a potential site for hosting bloggs, wikis, and threaded discussions to support subtasks of this SGAnnouncement of the ITSI-SG reflector hosted by SISOReview of the proposed framework for discussion and documentation of ITS interoperability to serve the term of this Study Group.  We agreed to a tentative plan for populating that framework but, running short of time decided to aggregate modifications by email and then define schedule of milestones, roles, and deliverables for the group and for individual members.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)12Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)15Peak attendance (including joint sessions)0Total papers presentedn/a“No-show” presentationsn/aOther presentations and panel discussions0Recommended Reading List nominations would include documentation of related standards efforts such as:JSIMS and JNTCLTSA IEEE 1484SCORM 1.3 standard specsHLA-SCORM architecture (unavailable, expected to appear Spring SIW ’04)John Tyler’s follow-on to LTSA and IEEE 1484 W3C standards for XML, semantic web, etc.LINK 16- Simulation Standard Product Development Group (LINK-16 PDG)ChairAdin BurroughsVice ChairJoe SorrocheSecretaryRobert ByersObjectives for this Workshop:1.	Final Review of Draft Standard2.	Election of New Chair3.	Motion to move Draft Standard to Review and Ballot ProcessComments and Recommendations:Did not complete Final Review of Draft Standard.  Will ask for final comments that didn’t get into final Draft from Link 16 PDG Reflector.Once Final draft is complete, will announce ballot and form a ballot pool, per Balloted Products Development Process (BPDB), SISO-ADM-003-2002.  Will also coordinate ballot package with HLA BOM PDG due to cross correlation with that group.2.	PDG Chair – Joe Sorroche; PDG Vice Chair – Adin Burroughs; PDG Secretary – 	Rob Byers; PDG TAD - Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)20Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)20Peak attendance (including joint sessions) (IO-ISR)20Total papers presented0“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions2Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):03F-SIW-002 Systemic Problems with Data Link Simulation03F-SIW-101 Transfer of Control Between Operational and Tactical Environment Generators.03S-SIW-140 Tactical Digital Information Link-Technical Advice and Lexicon for Enabling Simulation (TADIL-TALES)Logistics Forum (LOG)ChairDavid PayneVice ChairDavid ProchnowSecretaryPat JonesObjectives for this Workshop:1.	Focus Log Forum on emerging challenges / opportunities:a.	Simulation of Focused Logistics for JCIDS Analysis (New US DoD JCS Instruction to implement Capabilities driven requirements). Simulation specifically needed to support development and analysis of Joint Concepts (JOPSC, JOC, JFC) and Integrated Architecture (IA).b.	Simulation Of Multi Player Enterprises (Government and Commercial): Multi Agency, Global Distributed Enterprises, Supply Chains, Trading Networks)c.	Development Of New Simulation Techniques And Technology	i.	Rapid Collaborative Simulation Environments	ii. 	Linking Legacy And COTS Simulations 	iii.	Linking COTS ToolsComments and Recommendations:Enterprise Simulation is similar to logistics simulation. Trend is toward multi player enterprises, typically with dynamic systems, making simulation attractive for analysis, engineering, and tuning.Wide recognition that distributed process simulations are increasingly needed in complex enterprises. Three papers and panel discussion identified two broad approaches:Standardized COTS Simulation Interoperability, achieved through a standardized federated approach (focus on HLA-CSPIF effort).Standardized Distributed Collaborative Environments (focus on XML based (and related) approaches and BOM technology).LOG hosted two space related papers, one was presented only at LOG.LOG not identified on the 03F “Space Simulation” poster.03F-SIW-019 (on Space Weather Prediction) was poorly attended, probably due to poor publicity and late afternoon slot. Recommend a dedicated space simulation forum, or virtual forum embedded in another forum as a single block of time.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)16Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)30Peak attendance (including joint sessions)30 (no Joint)Total papers presented9Other presentations and panel discussions2Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):03F-SIW-03803F-SIW-12603F-SIW-074 (new -- based on solid presentation augmenting paper)Medical Simulation Forum (MED)Tuesday, 16 September 2003 0800-1130The Medical Simulation (MED) forum focuses on interoperability standards that build upon already extensive medical interface standards for operational systems for (including but not limited to) robot-assisted surgery; command & control systems for medical situational awareness; medical models of varying resolution for research and development; training systems for instruction and rehearsal; imaging systems for treatment planning and assessment; and logistic planning systems for security and disaster response. 0800-0830:  Introduction and welcome by Rick Sharp, track manager, and Bill Beavin, Co-Chair of Fall SIW Medical planning and review panel.  Gerry Moses, Co-Chair, was represented by Dr. Ken Curley and Harvey Magee from the U.S. Army Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center’s Medical Modeling and Simulation group.0830-0900:  	03F-SIW-063	Medical Planning: Requirement vs. Capability-Based Decision Making was presented by Walter Jansen, Jr.0900-0930:	03F-SIW-102	Creative Connection Between Multimedia, Simulation and Software Development Tools in the Design and Development of Biomedical Educational Simulators was presented by Dr. Jiøí Kofranek.0930-1000:	03F-SIW-104	 On the Integration of Legacy Biomedical Simulations into Federations Using the High Level Architecture was presented by Sean Murphy.1030-1100: 	03F-SIW-098	A Practical Guide to Implementing a Biomedical Federation Using the 1516 RTI with the C++ Interface was presented by Sean Murphy.1100-1115:  The Medical Track status was discussed and people were invited to the Thursday Medical FOM study group. (see the Medical FOM SG Outbrief)1115:  AdjournmentAverage attendance (excluding joint sessions)10Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)16Peak attendance (including joint sessions)N/ATotal papers presented  4“No-show” presentationsNoneOther presentations and panel discussionsNoneThe MED Forum recommends the following paper for publication:03F-SIW-043 	Medical Situational Support and Training   by Steve ArntzThe MED Forum recommends the following paper for the 2003 Fall “SIWzie” Recommended Reading List Award:03F-SIW-104	On the Integration of Legacy Biomedical Simulations into Federations Using the High Level Architecture   by Sean MurphyContact List:NameOrganizationEmail/PhoneStudy Group PositionBill BeavinBoeing HYPERLINK "mailto:william.c.beavin@boeing.com" william.c.beavin@boeing.com Co-ChairGerry MosesU.S. Army, TATRC HYPERLINK "mailto:moses@tatrc.org" moses@tatrc.org301-619-4000Co-ChairKen CurleyU.S. Army TATRC (MRMC-AT) HYPERLINK "mailto:curley@tatrc.org" curley@tatrc.org301-353-9240TATRC repHarvey MageeU.S. Army TATRC HYPERLINK "mailto:magee@tatrc.org" magee@tatrc.org301-619-4002TATRC repMedical Federation Object Model Study Group (MED FOM SG)Kick-Off Meeting Fall 2003 SIWChairWilliam Beavin (Boeing)Vice ChairRichard Severinghaus (Dynamic Animation Systems)Kenneth C. Curley (U.S. Army TATRC (MRMC-AT))SecretarySean Murphy (Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Lab)Meeting OverviewThe MED FOM Study Group had its inaugural meeting at the fall 2003 SIW.   Medical simulation systems have unique technical, operational, and regulatory requirements and serve a broad array of users and customers. Medical simulation increasingly needs interoperability standards that build upon already extensive medical interface standards.  The purpose of the Study Group is to identify by major category the full range of M&S applications needed by the healthcare community and to define, in the context of these applications, the relevant information exchange requirements.  The Study Group will recommend establishment of SISO Product Development Groups, to begin the formulation of new standards to fill identified gaps. Meeting ObjectivesThe major goals for this meeting were to:Overview state of Medical Modeling and Simulation from the perspective of TATRCCategorize MM&S into functional areas.Identify significant gaps in the existence of M&S interface standards, for which having such standards would improve the interoperability of live, virtual, and constructive medical models and simulations.Discuss desired study group objectives.Determine potential next steps and time frame for the study group.Elect officers	Comments, Recommendations, and ResultsRick Sharp, as Track Manager, reviewed history of Medical Track and formation of the Fall SIW Planning and Review Panel (Bill Beavin and Gerry Moses co-chaired). Noted that Medical is important both as an industry (size of market) and as a SISO group (this is a “test case” of starting an entirely new track with new study groups, etc).  Introduced Gene Wiehagen as our Technical Area Director.  Rick Severinghaus offered to assist the group with his considerable experience.  A repeated theme was that this is all so new to people and there are so few people from the medical realm participating, that concentrating on a FOM/BOM at this point might be premature.  Instead, consider this as the start of a medical track and build from there.  One goal will be to increase participation of MM&S community over next couple SIW’s. Harvey Magee and Ken Curley provided an excellent historical perspective of MM&S from the experience of the Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center (TATRC).  It was suggested by several people at several points that TATRC should have the same kind of leadership role in medical M&S that DMSO has had in other areas of M&S within SISO.  The suggestion was basically TATRC should “drive the bus” regarding interactions with medical M&S industry and what could/should be standardized.  SISO could provide experience and framework within which standards can be developed.The group discussed the need to assess the MM&S community to determine what things have been standardized (e.g. HL-7 and SNOMED)by whomwhat groups are trying to standardizewhat are their underlying motivationswhat are the market drivers behind interoperabilitywhat people feel needs to be standardizedIt was reiterated that SISO isn’t an “HLA organization” but a standards organization, and thus if another high-level standard is needed within MED, then the SISO organization is capable of helping with that.  The fact that standardization can be immensely expensive in money and time was discussed, and in this context long time SISO members stated that two of the valuable benefits of SISO participation is it, as an organization, already has a considerable wealth of experience and work on M&S standards, and, as a group of practitioners, much of SISOs work is, and has been, done by volunteers. Dr. Coolahan suggested that because MM&S is so broad, that we, as a Study Group, first consider vectors and standards for simulation for training and education (vs. straying off into biomolecular modeling for discovery research, etc) and defining existing object models. (e.g. what Sean Murphy has done)MM&S was categorized into three broad, functionally-defined categories:Training/EducationResearchLogistics AnalysisIt was mentioned that although the initial focus of the MM&S Interoperability SG would be on MM&S for Medical and Surgical Training, the SG’s efforts would also attempt to take into account MM&S for research.  The increasing need for higher physiological fidelity in MM&S for training/education can potentially drive these two currently separate areas to overlap and merge (thus requiring interoperability).It was agreed to change the Study Group name to “Medical Modeling and Simulation Interoperability Study Group” or “MM&S Interoperability SG” to better capture the group’s focus.Some groups have already begun work on addressing open standards for MM&S such as the Open Med Sim group at CIMIT ( HYPERLINK "http://www.openmedsim.org/" http://www.openmedsim.org/).  This work could form the basis of more extensive and formalized standardization efforts or at least provide a starting point.The Terms of Reference were briefly addressed.  The group leadership agreed to complete this via email/reflector discussion after the meeting. Officers were elected.It was suggested that one of the potential next steps is to have TATRC gently request the research groups and corporations that it work with attend the Spring 2004 SIW to foster a more open, effective, and inclusive MM&S Interoperability standards dialog.  It was also mentioned that the only way this effort could be successful was with considerable input and participation by the relevant MM&S community.Next StepsGenerate MM&S Interoperability SG outbrief (Ken?).Generate MM&S Interoperability SG meeting minutes (Sean).Set up reflector on SISO website (Bill?).Near-term telcon to determine additional next steps and action items.Survey the existing MM&S for Medical and Surgical Training community to determine (TATRC?)Relevant industry, government, and academic leaders and playersFunding sourcesExisting productsMarket factors and other industry drivers and motivationsFuture directions for this industry and technologyExisting and proposed standardsGroups developing new standardsOVERALL NEED FOR INTEROPERABILITY STANDARDSSurvey the existing MM&S for Research community to determine:Relevant industry, government, and academic leaders and playersFunding sourcesExisting simulationsMarket factors and other industry drivers and motivationsFuture directions for this industry and technologyExisting and proposed standardsGroups developing new standardsOVERALL NEED FOR INTEROPERABILITY STANDARDSActions for All Meeting AttendeesReview outbriefReview meeting notes Review draft of TORVisit SISO website and subscribe to SG reflector (http://www.sisostds.org/)Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)10Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)15Peak attendance (including joint sessions)N/ATotal papers presented            N/A“No-show” presentationsNoneOther presentations and panel discussions1Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):None.Contact List (as of Fall 03 SIW):NameOrganizationEmail/PhoneStudy Group PositionBill BeavinBoeing HYPERLINK "mailto:william.c.beavin@boeing.com" william.c.beavin@boeing.com ChairRick SeveringhausDynamic Animation Systems HYPERLINK "mailto:Rick.severinghaus@d-a-s.com" Rick.severinghaus@d-a-s.com (o) 757 412 4577(m) 757 348 4709Vice Chair/ MemberKen CurleyU.S. Army TATRC (MRMC-AT) HYPERLINK "mailto:curley@tatrc.org" curley@tatrc.org301-353-9240Vice Chair/ MemberSean MurphyJHU/APLsean.murphy@jhuapl.eduSecretaryHarvey MageeU.S. Army TATRC HYPERLINK "mailto:magee@tatrc.org" magee@tatrc.org301-619-4002TATRC repGerry MosesU.S. Army, TATRC HYPERLINK "mailto:moses@tatrc.org" moses@tatrc.org301-619-4000TATRC repResearch, Development & Engineering Forum (RD&E)ChairRalph WeberVice ChairBret Givens (Cynthia Ballard – Acting)SecretaryMark McCallObjectives for this Workshop:1.  Tighten focus on needs of the RDE community for Distributed Simulation.2.  Conduct a panel discussion on M&S for Space users.3.  Have at least one invited presentation from a non-traditional M&S user.Comments and Recommendations:1.	Had to bring in more chairs for SIW-024 (first presentation during joint session w/ T&E), which was a nice problem to solve!  Kudos to the Holiday Inn staff for reacting quickly to our needs.2.	Developing RTI benchmark performance test standards was a High-Interest Item (HII), based on the attendance during and questions after SIW-024.  Ralph Weber offered up the RDE e-mail reflector as a method for interested parties to provide feedback to Ray Drake (who presented SIW-024).3.	RDE (and by extension all User Fora) were originally set up to provide user requirements to the SISO community.  This input was to be addressed by the appropriate SA Forum or the CC or SAC.  There is currently no mechanism to ensure that user issues are addressed.  Recommend the CC establish a process to ensure that user issues are addressed by the appropriate SA Forum.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)36Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)41Peak attendance (including joint sessions)80Total papers presented7“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions1 – Panel Discussion,1 – Invited PresentationRecommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):03F-SIW-02403F-SIW-029Real-time Platform Reference FOM 2.0Product Development Group (RPR FORM PDG)ChairJim Kolger (MÄK Technologies)Vice ChairSecretaryDoug Wood (MÄK Technologies)Objectives for this Workshop:1.	Elect new chair.2.	Review and finalize RPR FOM 2.0 v173.	Review and finalize Guidance Rationale Interoperability Manual (GRIM) 2.0 v17.24.	Vote to move to community ballot.Comments and Recommendations:1.	Jim Kolger of MÄK Technologies elected as chair (pending approval by SAC).2.	RPR FOM 2.0 is ready for ballot.3.	GRIM 2.0 is ready for ballot.4.	Drafting group voted to move to community ballot.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)5Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)7Peak attendance (including joint sessions)7Total papers presented0“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions0Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):NoneSystem Acquisition and Product Development Forum (SAPD)ChairJim CoolahanVice ChairTim JahrenSecretary(none)Objectives for this Workshop:1.	Sharing actual experiences from both industry and government regarding M&S standards, information sharing, reuse, collaboration, business cases, policy and process, as applied to system acquisition and product development (SAPD).2.	Identifying approaches to key M&S issues in SAPD.3.	Identifying lessons learned in M&S application to SAPD.Comments and Recommendations:1.	Metadata is a significant issue for the discovery and reuse of data.  “Pedigree” metadata such as use constraints, including applicable operational context, is needed to describe the origin and applicability of data elements for many military analyses.  This type of metadata does not seem to be addressed in existing metadata standards.2.	The model-drive architecture (MDA), the simulation conceptual model, and the DoD Architecture Framework have significant commonalities and overlaps.  The relationships among these concepts warrant examination.Continued SISO focus on this topic is recommended, perhaps leading to a 	study group.Continued dialog to explore commonalities is warranted.3.	There is a need to investigate how the High Level Architecture (HLA) relates to the MDA, and the process for incorporating the HLA into the MDA suite of standards.SISO should begin a liaison with the Object Management Group (OMG) on this topic.  (Note: SAPD PRP member Judith Dahmann has volunteered to lead this liaison effort, and Jim Hollenbach has volunteered to assist.)4.	Planning for simulation support to system acquisition and product development is an important issue.  Some applicability has been demonstrated in the U.S. Army; it would be useful to broaden this across U.S. Service lines and internationally.A Product Development Group is recommended to formulate recommended practices for planning of simulation support to system acquisition and product development.  (Note: SAPD incoming vice-chair Jean Graffagnini, and outgoing SAPD vice-chair / current VWS chair Tim Jahren have volunteered to help in the establishment of this PDG.)Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)44Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)56Peak attendance (including joint sessions)56Total papers presented12“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions1Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):03F-SIW-09703F-SIW-04403F-SIW-054Simulation Conceptual Modeling Study Group (SCM SG)  ChairJake BorahVice ChairVacantSecretaryVacantObjectives for this Workshop:1.	The presentation of two papers relevant to the development of a simulation conceptual modeling process model to spur interactive discussion.2.	The identification of the components constituting a simulation conceptual modeling best practice.3.	The construction of a draft simulation conceptual modeling process framework using those identified components above.4.	The continuation of the Spring 04 SIW Final Report preparations. Comments and Recommendations:1.	Definitive guidance on simulation conceptual modeling practices for the M&S community is long overdue.2.	Simulation conceptual modeling is an important element of other ongoing SISO PDGs (BOM and VV&A FEDEP Overlay).3.	The development of simulation conceptual modeling guidance requires the creation of a “vision statement” for SCM, the establishment of a set crisp definitions for SCM terminology, and the organization of a set of development concepts for SCM.4.	A SCM PDG should be created at the earliest opportunity to maintain the momentum associated with the SCM SG. Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)40Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)40Peak attendance (including joint sessions)40Total papers presented2“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions0Synthetic Mission Space Forum (SMS)ChairPhil Zimmerman /Tony CerriVice ChairRick SeveringhausSecretary(acting) Rick SeveringhausObjectives for this Workshop:1.	Generate dialogue on the concept that there is value in discussing the many mechanisms/approaches/methods possible to create useful, extensible Synthetic Mission Spaces. The basic idea for the Forum was to explore overlaps, differences, and similarities between and among various “composable environments” (such as in  MC02, JSB, JVB, etc.) For this Workshop, the specific area identified for discussion was Federation Agreements.2.	Presentation of papers relevant to the development of Synthetic Mission Spaces to spur interactive discussion.3.	Explore community interest in developing and maintaining this Forum to address methods to address simulation composability and development of synthetic mission spaces.4.	Identify leaders for the Forum. For the near future:Co-Chairs – Phil Zimmerman, Tony CerriVice Chair – Rick SeveringhausSecretary – (acting)  Rick Severinghaus5.	Identify topics and themes for exploration next SIW. Comments and Recommendations:Federations have been put together in ways not expected, and in ways beyond what was envisioned by DMSO when HLA formalisms were first developed and migrated to IEEE standards. Individual federations provide a “synthetic mission space” of an extent sufficient to support the objectives of that federation, but there is no community wide process for “connecting” federations, without significant rework or new effort, to provide an expanded “synthetic mission space” able to serve connected Federations.  Nor are there in existence guidelines by which practitioners can leverage existing efforts to expand and enhance existing “synthetic mission spaces” already built to serve a specified need.There are in current community practice no informal “rules of order” or “best practices” to lead practitioners towards convergence of intent and implementation when faced with the problem of getting 2 or more existing federations to work together.An argument can be made that all the discussion, exchange of information, etc., that occurs during development of a set of SOMs and/or FOMs constitute de facto a set of “federation agreements” among interested parties. These informal agreements provide implementation details and/or guidelines required by programmers and others to come to convergence on what is necessary to complete a FOM/SOM development effort. In this sense, such ‘federation agreements’ are a “programmer’s guide” to the process. There was general agreement that there is value in exploring an effort to put more “structure” into the area of Federation Agreements. In current community practice, there appears to be informal support for this, but there is no established process for enabling reuse and/or extension of developed Federation Agreements.From the presentation of the six papers and dialogue during the Panel session, one thread of discussion centered on the idea of developing “checklists” to assist practitioners in developing Federation Agreements.  Participants agreed that no “universal checklist” now exists, and that effort is needed to investigate the practicality of developing a generic checklist of value to the community, and a process/method for implementing its use (e.g., perhaps via web or browser based technology). The general idea is to find a way to formalize in a sensible way the practices mentioned in 3. above. Based on the extensive discussions during the session, the Forum recommends exploring a proposal from the audience to form a group to look in some detail at Federation Agreements as a method facilitating simulation composability.There was general agreement that the focus of this Forum is distinct enough to be continued, and to be pursued as a venue separate from other existing SIW forums.Recommendations for future themes and/or main topics for the Spring 04 SIW were solicited. Offers to submit suggestions for reflector discussion were made by those in attendance.  Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)22Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)43Peak attendance (including joint sessions)NATotal papers presented6Other presentations and panel discussionsPanel Topic - Federation Agreements6Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):As a start up Forum, there are no nominations for this Workshop. All papers presented, and all presentations made during the extensive Panel discussion, provided content which contributed to the exploration of synthetic mission space concepts.Simulated Natural Environment  Forum (SNE)ChairDavid JodeitVice ChairWilliam RiggsSecretaryRobert Richbourg / Ronald MooreObjectives for this Workshop:1.	Get feedback from forum attendees on structure and goals for future workshops2.	Present special session on space weather3.	Provide update and status on SEDRISComments and Recommendations:1.	There appears to be a large continuing interest in issues of fidelity, precision and accuracy.  SNE plans to have some follow on work for Spring, but the CC may want to consider a global workshop theme on this.2.	Consensus from forum participants is that current format of having a mix of papers and invited presentations seems to be working fine.  They liked having a separation of times between the PDG/SG and the PRPs, but suggested that you may want to alternate days between them rather than front loading the week with PRPs and then having the PDG/SGs at the end. 3.	I posed the issue of whether or not computer graphics and visualization fits within the domain of the SNE PRP and the consensus is that it does.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)33Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)43Peak attendance (including joint sessions) (no joint sessions)43Total papers presented8“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions9Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):03F-SIW-03703F-SIW-062Simulation Reference Markup Language Study Group (SRML SG)ChairSteve ReichenthalVice ChairLarry RootSecretaryObjectives for this Workshop:Review the SRML TOR.Identify technical and non-technical aspects of standardizing a simulation markup language and corresponding simulation engine specification based on the Simulation Reference Markup Language (SRML). Capture the goals, needs, business case, and potential benefits to the simulation communitySummarize the SRML surveyRelate SRML to HLA, BOMs, XMSF, MDA, and other emerging trendsIdentify various forms or organizations for standardizationDemonstrate SRML simulations Comments and Recommendations:Recommend the M&S community to complete the SRML survey –found through the SRML reflector.Recommend a better conference room to meet.  The room needs the ACs running but then it is very difficult to hear.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)16Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)23Peak attendance (including joint sessions)0Total papers presented0Other presentations and panel discussions1Test & Evaluation Forum (T&E)ChairKurt LessmannVice ChairDoug BuchySecretarySharon HardyObjectives for this Workshop:1.	Focus on use of simulation in support of test & evaluation of systems, subsystems, and tactical procedures2.	Investigate lessons learned from distributed testing3.	Identification of T&E specific distributed test requirements  Comments and Recommendations:1.	45 Minute time slot for briefings worked well for having time for questions and answers following the presentationsAverage attendance (excluding joint sessions)24Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)32Peak attendance (including joint sessions)77Total papers presented including joint sessions/ excluding joint sessions7/3“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions0Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):03F-SIW-100Transfer Control Study Group (TC SG)ChairFrank Hill (SDS International)Vice ChairPatrick Merlet  (Sparta)Secretary(vacant)Objectives for this Workshop:1.	Select Vice Chair and Secretary.2.	Review draft Record Definitions and determine need for additional ones.3.	Review draft message sequences to replace the existing ones.4.	Review draft issuance and receipt rules to replace the existing ones.Comments and Recommendations:1.	The Transfer Control Study Group was assigned one half-day block on Wednesday (1330-1700).  We requested a room for another half day which we got on Thursday morning (0800-1200) to complete our work.2.	Draft Record Definitions were reviewed and modified after discussions. The Call Sign Record title was changed to Designation Record and made a more general record to include other than call sign information.3.	The existing transfer control message sequences and proposed changes were discussed.  A new set of draft message sequences was agreed to and Jerry Szulinski, DMOC will provide documentation for them to the group.4.	Draft issuance and receipt rules were discussed that will replace the existing rules to resolve ambiguities and clarify processing.5.	Pat Merlet volunteered to be vice-chair.6.	The group’s work is proceeding in phases as follows:Complete DIS Record Definitions and submit to DIS Enumeration Group.Review new DIS Records for impact on HLA RPR FOM and draft any required changes for inclusion in RPR FOM and GRIM.Complete DIS message sequence changes.Review new DIS message sequences for impact on HLA RPR FOM and draft any required changes for inclusion in RPR FOM and GRIM.Complete DIS issuance and receipt rule changes.Review new DIS issuance and receipt rules for impact on HLA RPR FOM and draft any required changes for inclusion in RPR FOM and GRIM.Research native HLA transfer ownership implementations to see if there are any needed changes to HLA specifications or guidance documents.Draft report with all HLA changes.Draft nomination for PDG.Draft final report.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)9Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)12Peak attendance (including joint sessions)NATotal papers presented0“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions0Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):None___________________________________Submitted by Frank Hill	404-464-4511	frank.hill@forscom.army.mil	23 September 2003Training Forum (TRAIN)ChairChris WertmanVice ChairScott JohnstonSecretaryVacantObjectives for this Workshop:Provide an interface between user requirements and standards development.Provide a forum for Users to describe M&S shortfalls.Provide linkage for the Users to the Technical Community.Provide a forum for the Technical Community to present potential solutions to Users.Comments and Recommendations:The new format for the workshops with all forums compressed into two days does not allow the Training Forum the best opportunity to meet their objectives.  Meeting the objectives assumes that members of the Technical Community, in particular the C4I forum was meeting at a different time than the Training Forum.  The new format, while it allows significantly greater opportunity for PDGs & SGs may significantly impact on Training’s ability to effectively interact with associated Technical Forums. We are not suggesting that the workshop return to the old format, however, we would ask that methods and processes be considered to facilitate this dialog and interactions which we believe could be lost.Several areas/presentations generated a great deal of interest and discussion which will be worth pursuing in future workshops.  These includeHuman Behavior Representation, particularly in OOTW & MOUT.Multi-Resolution representations within a single federation.Distributed & distance training capabilities demonstrated within the California National Guard.Performance Measurements in Simulations.We need to consider a method for previewing or pre-screening presentations prior to “final” acceptance for the workshop.  We realize this will impact on paper submittals and associated timelines, but we continue to find too many presentations which fail to focus on the audience, fail to present the key information until late in a presentation, then only minimally, and presenters who are unable to adequately present the material they have written.  This final area probably could not be addressed through previews, but we believe the first two could.  While this may reduce the total number of papers presented during the workshop, we would help to insure a certain minimal level of professionalism and academic integrity in the papers, which we believe is more important that absolute numbers of papers.Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)50Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)61Peak attendance (including joint sessions)63Total papers presentednn“No-show” presentationsnOther presentations and panel discussionsnRecommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):03F-SIW-02203F-SIW-058Verification, Validation, & Accreditation Forum (VV&A)ChairSimone YoungbloodVice Chair/RecorderSusan SolickObjectives for this Workshop:Provide additional examples of conceptual model development and applicationShow progress made in development of validation concepts and metricsReview ongoing metadata standardization activities and their impact on VV&AComments and Recommendations:The conceptual model is achieving increased acceptance as a necessary simulation and federation artifact Distributed Simulation community needs to distinguish between the terms:  substantive interoperability, semantic interoperability, and meaningful interoperabilityMetadata is the means by which data/model characteristics are made known, providing federation and simulation developers and evaluators with the information needed to assess interoperability  Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)39Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)55Peak attendance (including joint sessions)55Total papers presented  9“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions0Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):03F-SIW-00703F-SIW-05703F-SIW-109Verification, Validation & Accreditation Overlay to FEDEP Product Development Group (VV&A FEDEP PDG)ChairSimone YoungbloodVice ChairSusan SolickSecretaryVirginia DobeyObjectives for this Workshop:1.	Structure VV&A FEDEP PDGa.	Elect PDG Officersb.	Identify productc.	Identify milestones and develop plan 2.	Identify items of impact to the overlay and essential terminologyComments and Recommendations:1.	List of items of impact and essential terminology drafted, will be distributed for	review via reflector2.	Assembling list of references and sources, will be distributed for review via reflector3.	Drafting committee being formed, will hold interim meeting to scope initial draft4.	Decision on whether VV&A overlay should be IEEE or SISO deferredAverage attendance 28Peak attendance 32Total invited papers presented3“No-show” presentations0Discussion Sessions1Vehicle and Weapon System Modeling Forum (VWS)ChairTim JahrenVice ChairJohn PowersSecretaryVacantObjectives for this Workshop:1. Facilitate Standards 	Standards for Vehicle/Weapon System model development	Study Groups for areas of interest2. Exploring New Simulation Issues, Uses and ProcessesSimulation-Based Acquisition (SBA): SPMs/DPDs Simulation of New Weapon SystemsCGFs/SAFsEmbedded Simulation3.  Present Practical Advice, Tools and Lessons Learned	Developing HLA Simulations and Converting from DIS 	Applying Interoperable Simulations/Simulators4.  Capturing and Sharing Simulation Building Blocks	SOM’s and FOM’s	Conceptual Models or Abstractions	Reusable Code and DataComments and Recommendations:Transfer of Control between Federates can add capability to a Federation by further mixing the best qualities of each individual simulation (03F-SIW-101)Multi-Resolution Modeling continues to be an important technology in VWS Federations and will be a good topic for future workshops (03F-SIW-067)Commercial technology is emerging which enables the rapid generation of buildings in synthetic environments, with promising applications for MOUT, Special Forces, and Counter terrorism simulations. (03F-SIW-122)The Navy is developing a reusable simulation framework for analysis of Ship Self Defense across many of its programs. (03F-SIW-100)Average attendance (excluding joint sessions)27Peak attendance (excluding joint sessions)37Peak attendance (including joint sessions)45Total papers presented12“No-show” presentations0Other presentations and panel discussions3 “mini panels”Recommended Reading List nominations (including previous nominations):03F-SIW-100	03F-SIW-101PAGE  PAGE  2