RPR FOM PDG Meeting14 September 2006Chair: James GregVice Chair: VacantSecretary: Doug WoodTAD: Jim KoglerPresent:Jim Gregg,  HYPERLINK "mailto:james.w.gregg@boeing.com" james.w.gregg@boeing.comDoug Wood,  HYPERLINK "mailto:dwood@mak.com" dwood@mak.comJim Kogler,  HYPERLINK "mailto:jkogler@mak.com" jkogler@mak.comMike O’Connor,  HYPERLINK "mailto:michael.oconnor@itt.com" michael.oconnor@itt.comErik Hougland,  HYPERLINK "mailto:eric_gougland@navy.mil" eric_gougland@navy.milBrad Dillman,  HYPERLINK "mailto:Brad.Dillman@drdx-rddc.gc.ca" Brad.Dillman@drdx-rddc.gc.caSteve Dix,  HYPERLINK "mailto:Steven.E.Dix@Boeing.com" Steven.E.Dix@Boeing.comDouglas LaFont,  HYPERLINK "mailto:Douglas.LaFont@ngc.com" Douglas.LaFont@ngc.comLori Lane,  HYPERLINK "mailto:Lori.Lane@navy.mil" Lori.Lane@navy.milSteven Sheasby,  HYPERLINK "mailto:Ssheasby@Ratheon.com" Ssheasby@Ratheon.comPaul Gustavson,  HYPERLINK "mailto:Pgustavson@simventions.com" Pgustavson@simventions.comGraham ShanksMinutesAgenda•Call to order•Approval of minutes (skip this meeting)•Approve agenda•Technical Business–Present status – Jim Gregg–Recommend GRIM DG Editor – Jim Gregg–Establish coordination meetings – Jim Gregg–Discuss schedule – Jim Gregg•Drafting Group reports (optional)–FOM DG Editor – Graham Shanks–GRIM DG Editor - TBD•Next meeting–TBD•AdjournAgenda approved.Approval of minutes (skipped)StatusDraft 2.17 is a defacto standard in practice. The standard nominated will probably not incorporate newest enumerations with intent that 3.0 would incorporate updated changes.GRIM DG EditorSteve Diggs nominates self for GRIM DG EditorDoug motions to accept Steve’s nomination. Seconded by Jim Kogler. Motion unanimously approved.Coordination MeetingAction Item: Steve and Graham need to establish time and frequency.1516 FOM was not part of ballot. Comment to d17 was 1516 version. Status is unknown.Steve Sheasby will help with Grim.Action Item: Diggs to evaluate comments against current Grim.Action Item: Wood to review minutes to inform Diggs what GRIM comments were outstanding.Schedule•PN portion of schedule–Draft ballot package for informal comment resolution by October 15, 2006.  Package includes resolutions to accepted comments.–Pre-invite potential ballot group members to review when draft is provided.–Ballot invitation by 1 November, 2006.–Complete if passes and submit approval package to SAC by 1 February.–If recirculation necessary, submit approval package to SAC by 15 March.•Post ballot–RPR-FOM 3 discussion thread initiated at package appears to be stable.–RPR-FOM 3 organization and TOR Spring SIW 2007.Action Item: Kogler to look up requirements of starting a PSG and post them on the reflector.Suggestions to educate potential ballot pool on status and plans.Action Item: Wood will post comments and resolution from previous comment rounds.Action Item: (10/15) Graham will post draft 2.0d18 that includes comment resolutions from previous comment round.Action Item: (10/15) Dix will post draft 2.0d18 that includes comment resolutions from previous comment round.Consensus was achieved on schedule.Editor ReportsGraham indicated that FOM changes are basically completed. However, the 1516 FOM file does need a good amount of work.Previous GRIM DG Editor was not present. Graham reported that a good amount of work is required to bring GRIM inline with FOM changes.AdjournWood motions to adjurn, Sheasby seconds. Motion approved.Action Items2006FSIW-1:	Steve and Graham need to establish time and frequency.2006FSIW-2:	Diggs to evaluate comments against current Grim.2006FSIW-3:	Wood to review minutes to inform Diggs what outstanding Grim comments were outstanding.2006FSIW-4:	Kogler to look up requirements of starting a PSG and post them on the reflector.2006FSIW-5:	Wood will post comments and resolution from previous comment rounds.2006FSIW-6:	(10/15) Graham will post draft 2.0d18 that includes comment resolutions from previous comment round.2006FSIW-7:	(10/15) Dix will post draft 2.0d18 that includes comment resolutions from previous comment round.