RPR FOM PDG Meeting6 April 2006Chair: VacantVice Chair: VacantSecretary: Doug WoodTAD: Jim KoglerPresent:Jim Gregg, james.w.gregg@boeing.comFrank Hill, frhill@isp.comJim Kogler, jkogler@mak.comGrayden Figart, grayden.figart@mantech.comGrHM Shanks, graham.shanks@baesystems.comAlan Berry, alan.berry@kirkland.af.milSteve Padilla, steve.padilla@kirkland.af.milJames Johnson, jamesh.johnson.ctr@lackland.af.milDouglas Pouk, douglas.a.pouk@boeing.comMike Oâ€™Connor, michael.oconnor@itt.comBridgette Townsend, bridgette.a.towndsend@l-3com.comJames Globe, james.s.globe@l-3com.comLlyod Copland, lloyd.copeland@itt.comErik Hougland, eric_gougland@navy.milDon Mcgredo, mcgredo@nfs.navy.milSandy McPherson, sandra.r.mcphersion@boeing.comBob Murray, bob.murry@boeing.comBill Rivera, brivera@systechnologies.comKen Kingston, kenneth.kingston@disa.milHoang Doan, hoang.doan@navy.milMark Crnarich, mark.crnarich@ngc.comShane Arnott, shane.d.arnott@boeing.comMark McCall, james.mccall@mesa.afmc.af.milRober Butterfield, robert.butterfield@asti-use.comPaul Houldsworth, paul.houldsworth@asti-usa.comMinutesDoug Wood ran the meeting. Jim Kogler has resigned. Doug presents agenda to pick new PDG Chair. Vote by hands on approving the agenda. All in favor, no opposed. Grahm moves that Jim Gregg becomes chair. Grayden seconds. No objections. Jim Gregg becomes the chair and runs the meeting. Jim Gregg proposes that Jeff Hernandes (not present) becomes the GRIM editor. Jim K asks if Jeff H will be able to attend future SIW /PDG meetings. Grahm makes motion to make Jeff Hernandes GRIM editor.  Jim K seconds. All in favor, no opposed. Graham proposes to appoint Bourn Moller (Pitch/Not present) an assisting FOM drafting editor. Jim K seconds. All in favor, no opposed. Jim Gregg  proposes to form new ballot group since existing group has become stale.Mark McCall indicates that ballot group cannot be disbanded unless it is not viable.Jim Gregg will poll the ballot group to figure out if there are enough active members to complete ballot. If not PDG will form a new group. Jim Gregg moves to update the PN for schedule. Discussion ensues. Points made1) The PN need not be updated for schedule. Only the TAD needs to be informed. 2) The point of updating the PN for schedule is to list 3.0 as a goal that matches IEEE1278.1a. 3) Many people in the room informally commit to support the PDG. Graham moves to update the schedule to mirror DIS 1278-1a schedule.  Allan Berry seconds, 19 for it1 opposed. Motion passes. Mark McCall poses an issue for the next meeting. Does 2.0 replace 1.0,  (ie, do we withdraw 1.0 when 2.0 comes out)?Graham says: We believe that the RPR FOM 2.0 will supersede the RPR FOM 1.0. However, the RPR FOM 1.0 will still be available as an archived standard. Doug W moves to adjourn. Action Items:060406-1 (Jim Gregg): Poll current ballot group for ability to participate and complete the ballot.