HLA Evolved PDG Meeting MinutesApril 5-6, 2006Huntsville, ALPresiding Officer:	Roy Scrudder, Chair	Bob Lutz, OMT Editor	Reed Little, I/F Spec Editor	Mike Lightner, Rule EditorRecording Secretary:	Katherine L. MorseAgendaAdministrative comments and status reviewResolution of comments on the HLA OMTResolution of comments on the HLA I/F SpecResolution of comments on the HLA RulesApril 5:  Administrative comments:  1530 - 1550Scrudder reviewed voting, membership, and process rulesScrudder reviewed the IEEE and SISO policies prohibiting inclusion of proprietary IP in SISO standardsResolution of Comments on the HLA Rules:  1550 - 1705400:  A1 without objection402:  A4 – the proposed resolution to comment 401 provides a definition of HLA framework; without objection401:  A2 – with the text proposed by Lightner and modified by the PDG; Lightner will correct minor remaining editorial issues; a reference to the FEDEP (IEEE 1516.3) needs to be added to the reference section; without objectionResolution of Comments on the HLA OMT:  1705 – 1730; 1900 - 211036 comments this round; 19 editorial; 17 technical400, 401, 403, 404, 405, 408, 413, 417, 420, 421:  accepted all of the DG’s recommendations without objections424:  A2 – strike the second and last sentences of 4.7.3; without objection425:  D2 - don’t add the text because this information is covered in the inclusion criteria; without objection426: D2 - don’t make the change because this information is covered in the inclusion criteria; without objection427:  D2 - don’t add the text because this information is covered in the inclusion criteria; without objection428:  A2 – with the DG member’s recommendation, but “a named datatype” rather than “a named datatypes,” and strike “by the user” at the end of the second sentence; without objection406:  A2  - “The HLA does not require specific user-defined object classes or object class hierarchy to appear in the object class structure table;” without objection407:  A1; without objection409: A2 – “It should be noted that the predefined…” to be consistent with sentence structure use elsewhere; without objection429:  HR – in addition to delaying until the I/F spec is complete (especially comment 464), there are a few services that are required for all federates and a different set for federations; these services should default to “Yes” in SOMs and FOMs; Borah and Saunders prepared an example table; Borah and Saunders to produce the text and circulate on the reflector for comment; there was a discussion about whether this applied to FOMs or just to SOMs; the supporting text should describe this as supporting federate compliance testing, but is not to be enforced by RTIs; needs a different title than “conformance statement;” without objection410:  “acquire only” makes sense in the presence of an initialization federate that registers objects with the express intent of other federates acquiring their attributes; A2 – allow all designations for both SOMs and FOMs, and merge the sections on SOM and FOM; Lutz to propose rewritten text; without objection411:  A4 to be consistent with 410; search the document for “to another federate” and ensure that they’re valid in conjunction with these comments; without objection412:  A4 to be consistent with 410; insert “using the HLA ownership management services in the description of acquire; search the document for “from another federate” and ensure that they’re valid in conjunction with these comments; without objection415:  A2 - with the DG member’s recommendation; without objection419, 422:  D2 - the DG interprets this as a technical comment rather than an editorial comment, and disagrees with its premise; precede this sentence with an appropriate qualifier to clarify that it applies to both SOMs and FOMs; without objection402:  D2 – the DG and PDG have considered this issue before and rejected changes in this area, but we still felt the need to debate the topic again; 16/1/0434:  A2 - hold until discussion of I/F spec comment 462; change column header to “Reliability” and the contents to “Reliable” or “Best Effort;” change description in subsequent paragraph to agree with this rewording; without objection418: A2 - with the second alternative of the DG member’s recommendation; need to add a reference to the Authoritative Dictionary of IEEE Standards Terms to section 2; without objection423: A2 – with the DG member’s recommendation; without objection414:  A2 – with the DG member’s recommendation; without objection416:  A2 – “Sets of ranges that advertise a publishing federate’s ability to match subscriptions interests;” append “in object class attributes and interactions” to the description of subscription regions immediately preceding; without objection430:  A1; without objection431:  A2 - with the DG member’s recommendation432 and 433:  A1435:  impacts I/F spec and potentially rules 1 and 3; suggestion to allow FOM submission at federation creation for backward compatibility; Möller presented supporting detailed information; Gustavson presented briefing on namespace issues; HTT (Möller lead; Tapp, Granowetter, Gustavson, Shanks, Schloman, Wood, Löfstrand, Little, Lutz, Lightner); without objectionApril 6:Resolution of Comments on the I/F Spec: 0815 – 1000; 1030 – 1200; 1330 – 1500; 1530 - 1715414:  A1; without objection448:  D2; without objection452:  D4; since none of the vendors replied to the outstanding action item to describe fault tolerance characteristics, Morse moved to reject; Wilson seconded; without objection459:  A1; without objection460:  A2 – “optional argument” rather than “empty string;” section 12 will also need a mapping of empty arguments to datatypes (API tiger team); without objection463:  A1; without objection407:  D1 – the PDG didn’t concur that it penalizes centralized RTIs and that it would significantly complicate writing federates for distributed RTIs; without objection434:  A1; without objection406, 408:  A2 – see revised solution sent to reflector, but strike “unnecessary elements of a passel shall be discarded but” because it’s redundant with other language about attribute delivery; without objection438:  W439:  A2 – Wood to provide details; discussed discarding the current call and callback for single names, but decided to keep it for backward compatibility with existing federates; need to add language to preclude multiple name callback in response to multiple single name calls and to preclude multiple single name callbacks in response to a multiple name call; discussion of having two callbacks, one for successes and one for failures; also discussed the fact that the illegal name exception could be thrown for the entire list even though only one might be illegal; there is precedent for this with attribute names in publication; may use the precedent in Federation Save Status Response; Wood will draft new text and post to reflector; without objection453:  A4 – with text provided by Labin and consistent with comment 330; without objection454:  A2 – add definition of wall clock time; without objection455:  A3 – new transportation types will be described in a separate SISO document, not the spec; without objection456:  A3 - see briefing sent to reflector by Little, but remove “corrupted;” without objection462, 350:  A2 – see comment 455; without objection410, 411, 412, 444:  A2 - there was a lively discussion about the fact that the spec is currently ambiguous about when subscriptions are evaluated; add federation-wide switch to OMT to select “early” or “late;” need better nomenclature and associated definitions; switch not changeable at runtime; RTI developers may choose to implement one, the other, or both; trying to select an unsupported setting of the switch will thrown and invalid FOM document exception in Create Federation Execution; need descriptions in I/F spec sections 6.1.x and 8.1.x; Saunders lead, RTI developers will provide input; without objection461:  A2 - Changes defined by tiger team (see action item); without objection446:  D2 – per the DG member’s recommendation; 16/1/1415:  A1; without objection418:  A1; without objection435:  A1; without objection442, 449:  A2; Snively and Wood to provide final version; MOM parameters of length zero may be interpreted as null or undefined (section 1.4.3); search entire spec to verify that labels and names (anything implemented as strings) are not allowed to have zero length, inserting illegal name exceptions where appropriate; without objection445:  A1; requires commensurate change to sample FOM with MOM in the OMT; without objection447:  A1; without objection450:  A2 – Add text to state that each returned argument is an element on the list of returned arguments; number of returned arguments depends on front narrative, not on any particular API; note in MOM parameter lexicon table; without objection465:  D4; 15/3/1433:  A1; without objection436, 330:  A2; RTIs shall implement both; missing C++ enum from Karlsson’s white paper; no objection457, 331:  A1; Karlsson, Granowetter, Pearce, Wilson, Labin to complete; without objection423-430, 432:  A1; without objection431:  A2; producing federate designator is present, but empty for the RTI as the producer for MOM; without objection437:  A1; without objection440:  A1; including WSDL; without objection422:  A1; without objection441:  A1; without objection416: A1; without objection400:  A1; OMT schema tiger team incorporates name and version; without objection443:  A1; without objection458, 201, 204:  A1; Möller to provide updated version with https as part of final API delivery; without objection327: W328: A1; without objection409:  W401: A1; without objection402:  A2; case b) RO and TSO non-FQR; c) all other TSOs; without objection464, 231:  A2; Saunders will provide a replacement to the last paragraph of 1.3 with an updated version of his original conformance statement in comment 231 that does not allow subset RTIs; subsequently there will be a reflector discussion and vote on subset RTIs; without objection211:  Wuerfel provided a report on progress in updating the APIs; add support services for GetTransportationTypeName and GetTransportationTypeHandle; final organization of new services in the body of the spec will impact ordering in the APIs466:  tiger team for OMT comment 435453:  A3; without objectionAdministrative Discussion and Action Item Review:  1715 - 1755PDG feels we’ll be ready to go to ballot after the submitted comments are completed, but a final determination will be made based on the updated draftOMT comment 429 and Modular FOM comments can be resolved via teleconSchedule for completion:15 Apr	Subset RTI posting29 Apr	Subset RTI evote starts8 May	Subset RTI evote ends21 Apr	OMT Federate Conformance language15 May	Modular FOM posting22 May	Modular FOM / OMT conformance language telecon9 Jun	All changes in specs drafted (except IF Spec Section 12, API, and schemas)30 Jun	IF Spec Section 12, API, and schemas drafted14 Jul	Complete specs ready for ballot 				decision/evote upcoming28 Jul	Evote for ballot decision starts4 Aug	Evote on ballot decision endsAction ItemsForm tiger team and work solution to I/F Spec comment 461, include OMT changes; coordinate with API tiger team [Moller; 6/9/06]API TT to provide set of C++ encoding helpers per I/F Spec comment 433 [Moller; 6/30/06]Provide final text for I/F Spec comments 410, 411, 412, 444 [Saunders and RTI vendors; 6/9/06]Provide final text for I/F Spec comment 439 [Wood; 6/9/06]Correct minor remaining editorial issues on Rules comment 401 and recirculate on the reflector for discussion [Lightner; 6/9/06]Produce the text to complete OMT comment 429 and circulate on the reflector for comment; hold telecon with Modular FOM topic [Borah and Saunders; 4/21/06]Propose rewritten text for OMT comment 410 [Lutz; 6/9/06]Establish tiger team for OMT comment 435 and I/F spec comment 466; Möller lead; volunteers present Tapp, Granowetter, Gustavson, Shanks, Schloman, Wood, Löfstrand, Little, Lutz, Lightner, Cutts, Morse, Snively, Chase, Watrous; followed one week later by a telecon [Möller; 5/15/06]Provide final version of text for I/F spec comments 442 and 449 [Snively and Wood; 6/9/06]Complete text for I/F spec comments 457 and 331 [Karlsson, Granowetter, Pearce, Wilson, Labin; 6/9/06]Provide updated version of WSDL API with https as part of final API delivery; I/F spec comments 458, 201, and 204 [Möller; 6/30/06]Send subset RTI recommendations to the reflector for discussion [Saunders; 4/15/06]Investigate formulation of ballot pool [Morse; 4/15/06]